
# Table of Contents

1.  [arithmetic](#orgcf05f10)
    1.  [division](#org1ab2e45)
    2.  [infix vs prefix style](#orgae864d3)
        1.  [infix style](#orga5257f6)
        2.  [prefix style](#org2b549b4)
    3.  [Operator precedence](#orgbed4b08)
        1.  [associativity](#org5cdcf02)
2.  [booleans](#orgc956e2e)
    1.  [](#org837776b)
        1.  [comments](#org7224505)
3.  [expression](#org46caf96)
4.  [Constant](#org51af270)
    1.  [Naming Constants](#org5e38fca)
5.  [If Expresssions](#orgac56747)
6.  [Functions](#orgc5a7f9a)
    1.  [Partial Function Application](#org9d9b2d3)
    2.  [opperators vs functions](#orgb79e031)
7.  [Let expressions](#org464b237)
8.  [Case Expressions](#org4931df8)
    1.  [patern Matching](#org53c7c33)
9.  [Indentation](#orgfe487d8)
    1.  [definitions](#orgb2d8c90)
        1.  [if expressions](#org5aec019)
        2.  [let expression](#orgbbf0bd9)
        3.  [Basic Indentation Rules](#orge76052e)
10. [Strings](#org728a64a)
    1.  [Multiline Strings](#org4ab5879)
    2.  [calculating Length](#orga054db2)
        1.  [combing Strings](#org15d3802)
    3.  [Splitting a String](#orgdb86fcf)
    4.  [Reversing a String](#org47296db)
    5.  [Filtering a String](#org25c6d3f)
    6.  [Anonymous Function](#orgf2684f1)



<a id="orgcf05f10"></a>

# arithmetic


<a id="org1ab2e45"></a>

## division

there is two forms of division in elm

1.  &ldquo;/&rdquo; for floating point
2.  &ldquo;//&rdquo; for integer


<a id="orgae864d3"></a>

## infix vs prefix style


<a id="orga5257f6"></a>

### infix style

more traditional placing the operator in between the numerical arguments

    1 + 2
    3 : number
    
    42 * 10
    420 : number


<a id="org2b549b4"></a>

### prefix style

more functional placing the operator in front of the numerical arguments

    (+) 1 2
    3 : number
    
    (*) 42 10
    420 : number


<a id="orgbed4b08"></a>

## Operator precedence

Several operators can be used in a single line.

    42 * 200 - 8000
    400
    
    (42 * 200) - 8000
    400
    
    42 * (200 - 8000)
    -327600

we can use parentheses to change the order operaters are applied \* has a higher precedence than -. So if we want the - to be apllied first, then we must apply parentheses around its arguments.

Elm assigns numeric precedence values to operators, with 0 being the lowest precedence and 9 being the hightest. higher precedence number is applide first


<a id="org5cdcf02"></a>

### associativity

associativity determines if an expression with multiple ooperators is evaluated from left to right or right to left

elm names are left-associative and right-associative

+, -, \*, / are all left-associative

and ^ is right-associative

    2 ^ 3 ^ 2
    512
    
    (2 ^ 3) ^ 2
    64

<!-- This HTML table template is generated by emacs 29.4 -->
<table border="1">
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;Operators&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;Precedence&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;Associativity
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      >>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      9&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      left&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      <<&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      9&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      right&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      ^&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      8&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      right&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      *&nbsp;/&nbsp;//&nbsp;%&nbsp;rem
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      7&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      left&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      +&nbsp;-&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      6&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      left&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      ++&nbsp;::&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      5&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      right&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      ==&nbsp;/=&nbsp;<&nbsp;>&nbsp;<=
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      4&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      none&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &&&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      3&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      right&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      ||&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      2&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      right&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      |>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      0&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      left&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>


<a id="orgc956e2e"></a>

# booleans

Preforming operations from Boolean algebra is also quite straightforward in ELm

    || - or
    && - and
    not - negation
    xor - exclusive

elm dose not consider the number 0 or null as a synonymous with false nor non-zero to be true it must be exact


<a id="org837776b"></a>

## 

<!-- This HTML table template is generated by emacs 29.4 -->
<table border="1">
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;Operator&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;Meaning&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;==&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;Equal&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;/=&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;Not&nbsp;Equal&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;greater&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;<&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;less&nbsp;than&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;<=&nbsp;>=&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;or&nbsp;equal&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;max&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;large&nbsp;of&nbsp;2&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;min&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
    </td>
    <td align="left" valign="top">
      &nbsp;small&nbsp;of&nbsp;2&nbsp;
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>


<a id="org7224505"></a>

### comments

single Line comments are done with &ldquo;&#x2013;&rdquo;

Multi-line Comments start with &ldquo;{-&rdquo; and end with &ldquo;-}&rdquo;

1.  tips

    to toggle a comment you can use an extra &ldquo;-&rdquo; and then add in a &ldquo;}&rdquo; to closes it
    
    {&#x2013;
    some code
    
    &#x2013;}
    
    {&#x2013;}
    some code
    &#x2013;}


<a id="org46caf96"></a>

# expression

elm treights anything that evaluates to a value is an expression

so not just expressions like

    1 + 2
    3

but also 

    5
    5 : number

because 5 already has a value of 5 it needs no further evaluation and is there for considered an expression


<a id="org51af270"></a>

# Constant

elm lets us name expressions like

    x = (4 + 5) / 3
    4

we can now always refer to the expression &ldquo;(4 + 5) / 3&rdquo; as x

elm gives the name constant to any name the defins an expression

elm also give constants of its own such as pi

remember that everything in elm is an expression


<a id="org5e38fca"></a>

## Naming Constants

constants should always be named with Camel case

we are allowed to have numbers in the name

old elm can have apostrophes but not anymore

we can have Underscores but it is against convention

we cannot have spacial characters


<a id="orgac56747"></a>

# If Expresssions

if has 3 parts in elm

1.  A condition
2.  An expression to evaluate if true
3.  An expression to evaluate if false

we must always provide an else case

just like everything in elm an if is an expression and returns a value

we can capture that value

    whatToDo = if raining then bringUnbrella else leaveUnbrella
    
    whatToDo
    bringUnbrella

we can also add more branches with else if

    if  somthing then
        doSomthing
       else if somthingElse then
                doTHat
        else
        doNothing


<a id="orgc5a7f9a"></a>

# Functions

A function is a relationship between a set of inputs to a set of possible outputs where each input is mapped to exactly one output 

    escapeEarth myVelocity =
        if myVelocity > 11.186 then
            "godspeed"
        else
            "Come back"
    
    
    escapeEarth 11.2
    "godspeed"

like everything in elm funcons are expression and can be mapped to constants

the first line of a functions defeniton much be indented atleast onec

functions can be passed around just as any value like arguments


<a id="org9d9b2d3"></a>

## Partial Function Application

elm lets us partialy assign paramitirs

    multiplyByThree = multiply 3
    multiplyByThree 4
    12
    multiplyByThree 5
    15

this lets us set a paramitir then elm will return the function waiting for the next value


<a id="orgb79e031"></a>

## opperators vs functions

operaters are functions also but differ in 3 main ways

1.  Naming
    operaters cant have letters or numbers in there names jsut how functions cannot have special chars in theres
2.  number of agruments
    operators cant have more than 2 arguments while functions have no limmits
3.  application Style
    oporators are applied by writing the first argument, followed by the operator, follewb by the second argument (infix style)
    normal funcons are apllyed with prefix-style


<a id="org464b237"></a>

# Let expressions

let is how we can assin names to values in local scope


<a id="org4931df8"></a>

# Case Expressions

case expressions let use check meany valuse eficiently

    weekday dayInNumber =
        case dayInNumber of
            0 ->
                "sunday"
            1 ->
                "monday"
            2 ->
                "Tuseday"
            3 ->
                "wendnesday"
            4 ->
                "thursday"
            5 ->
                "friday"
            6 ->
                "saturday"
            _ ->
                "unknow Day"

case works by matting a expression to a pattern. when a match is found, it evaluates the expression to the right of -> and returns whatever value is produced


<a id="org53c7c33"></a>

## patern Matching

pattern matching is the act of checking one or more inputs again a pre-defind pattern and seeing if they match

the expression after the keyword case can be anything from a simple value to a complex computation including a function.

for example we can make a case that returns a hastag for each day of the week provied by the weekday function

    hastag dayInNumber =
        case weekday dayInNumber of
            "sunday" ->
                "#dayofrest"
            "monday" ->
                "#gloomyMonday"
    
            ect ...

elm style guid says that we should be using a new line afte the -> in each case becase of ease of modification in the future

case should be used with patterns and if is for use with conditions that dont have apattern


<a id="orgfe487d8"></a>

# Indentation

elm dose not use syntactic markers such as {  } or (  ) or ; to specify code boundaries. it uses whitespace and indentainos instead


<a id="orgb2d8c90"></a>

## definitions


<a id="org5aec019"></a>

### if expressions

if expressions must be placed inside a function defeniton, otherwise elm with throw an error.

the part after then and final else should be place on the next line indented with four spaces. it&rsquo;s perfectly fin to place an if expression inside a let or case expression as long as they themselves are placed inside of a let or case as long as they them self&rsquo;s are inside a function


<a id="orgbbf0bd9"></a>

### let expression

the code inside of a let expression should be indented by at leaste one space


<a id="orge76052e"></a>

### Basic Indentation Rules

module, import, and top-level function definitions must start at the left most column.
If an expression is split into multiple lines, the code that is part of that expression must be indented under that expression with at least one space.
Parts of the expression that are grouped together should be indented with equal number of spaces. This rule is particularly important in the let area.


<a id="org728a64a"></a>

# Strings

in elm, Strings are represnted with double quotes

    "pretzels"

and Characters are represented with single quotes:

    'p'

Character literals must contain exactly one character. Therefore, these expressions are not allowed in elm

    'abc' ,  ''


<a id="org4ab5879"></a>

## Multiline Strings

Multi-line strings are created using &ldquo;&rdquo;".

    """
        It became very clear to me sitting out there today
        that every decision I've made in my entire life has
        been wrong. My life is the complete "opposite" of
        everything I want it to be. Every instinct I have,
        in every aspect of life, be it something to wear,
        something to eat - it's all been wrong.
    """

\\ tells elm that the double quotes after arnt there to end the string

    "tyles awsome day out \" so that we can show the thing"


<a id="orga054db2"></a>

## calculating Length

to calculate a string&rsquo;s lenght, we can use the lenght function from the String module.

    String.lenght "Creed bratton"
    13

it is a good idea to use the standard library prefix eg String.\_\_\_ becasue it helps with clashing with functions from other modules but if we wish to use the function without the prefix we can use the exposing keyword

    import String exposing (length)
    
    lenght "tyle perry"

but we can get in to trubble fast

    import String exposing (lenght)
    import List exposing (lenght)
    
    lenght -- what function should it use???

this will throw an error

string also has a function called isEmply that tells us wther a stirng is emply or not

    String.isEmply ""
    True
    
    String.isEmply "kyle"
    False


<a id="org15d3802"></a>

### combing Strings

++ operater is used to concatenate two strings

    "These pretzels are " ++ "makin' me thirsty!"
    "These pretzels are makin' me thirsty!"

but we cant use it combine characters or number these will throw erros

one way to combine chars is to convet them to a string first. we can use the from char functon to do that

    (String.fromChar 'p') ++ (String.fromChar 'r')
    "pr"

we can also combine two string using the append function.

    String.append "Tyler" "perry"
    "Tyler perry"

for multiple strings there is a few ways

one way is to use the ++

    "Bears. " ++ "Beats. " ++ "Battlestar Gallactica."
    "Bears. Beats. Battlestar Gallactica."

Technically speaking, the <del>+ operator combines only two strings. In our example above, Elm first applies +</del> to &ldquo;Bears. &rdquo; and &ldquo;Beats. &rdquo; resulting in &ldquo;Bears. Beats. &rdquo;. It then applies ++ with &ldquo;Battlestar Gallactica.&rdquo; as a second argument to produce the final string. We can also use append to combine more than two strings. Although it tends to get a bit verbose.

    String.append (String.append "Butter shave, " "Voice, ") "Serenity now"
    "Butter shave, Voice, Serenity now"

Another way of concatenating multiple string is by using the concat function which requires us to put individual string ino a list

    String.concat [ "Bears. ", "Beats. ", "Battlestar Gallactica." ]
    "Bears. Beats. Battlestar Gallactica."

Notice how we included the space between words as part of the individual strings themselves. That looks awkward. If we use the join function instead, we don’t have to do that.

    String.join " " [ "Bears.", "Beats.", "Battlestar Gallactica." ]
    "Bears. Beats. Battlestar Gallactica."

join takes two parameters:

-   A separator that separates individual strings when they all get combined.
-   A list of strings.

The separator can be anything we want.

    String.join "/" [ "Bears.", "Beats.", "Battlestar Gallactica." ]
    "Bears./Beats./Battlestar Gallactica."
    
    String.join " thatswhatshesaid " [ "Bears.", "Beats.", "Battlestar Gallactica." ]
    "Bears. thatswhatshesaid Beats. thatswhatshesaid Battlestar Gallactica."


<a id="orgdb86fcf"></a>

## Splitting a String

We can use the split function te break a staring into multiple parts. it&rsquo;s the exact opposite of join.

    String.split " " "Bears. Beats. Battlestar Gallactica."
    ["Bears.","Beats.","Battlestar","Gallactica."]


<a id="org47296db"></a>

## Reversing a String

we can reverse a string with the reverse function

    String.reverse "red"
    "der"
    
    palindrome word = word == String.reverse word -- if the word is the same as it's self reversed return ture


<a id="org25c6d3f"></a>

## Filtering a String

the filter function works a little strange is elm

    String.filter '-' "222-11-5555"
    
    ----------------- TYPE MISMATCH -------------------
    The 1st argument to `filter` is not what I expect:
    
    7|   String.filter '-' "222-11-5555"
                       ^^^
    This argument is a character of type:
    
        Char
    
    But `filter` needs the 1st argument to be:
    
        Char -> Bool

It expects a function that takes a character and returns a boolean.

    isValid char = char /= '-'
    
    isValid "-"
    False
    isValid 2
    True

    String.filter isValid "222-11-5555"
    "222115555"


<a id="orgf2684f1"></a>

## Anonymous Function

Sometimes its desirable to inline the functon that determines whether or no wlt a value should be filtered insted of defining it separately

    String.filter (\char -> char /= '-') "222-11-5555"
    "222115555"

